docs/source/index.rst, before:


========================
Using the fixture module
========================

fixture is a python module for loading and referencing test data

It provides several utilities for achieving a *fixed state* when testing
Python programs.  Specifically, these utilities setup / teardown databases and
work with temporary file systems.  This is useful for testing and came about to
fulfill stories like these:

- I want to load data into a test database and easily reference that data when making assertions.
- I want data linked by foreign key to load automatically and delete without integrity error.
- I want to reference linked rows by meaningful names, not hard-coded ID numbers.
- I don't want to worry about auto-incrementing sequences.
- I want to recreate an environment (say, for a bug) by querying a database for real data.
- I want to test with files in a temporary, transparent file system.

For more info, this concept is explained in the wikipedia article, `Test Fixture`_.

.. _Test Fixture: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_fixture

*Database testing is easier than I had thought. Kumar's fixture helps provide a stable database to drive testing.* -- `Steven F. Lott, summarizing PyCon 2007`_

.. _Steven F. Lott, summarizing PyCon 2007: http://homepage.mac.com/s_lott/iblog/architecture/C1597055042/E20070226153515/index.html

.. _download-fixture:

------------------
Download / Install
------------------

Using the easy_install_ command::

    easy_install fixture

Or `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_ ::

    pip install fixture

If you want to use decorators like :meth:`@fixture.with_data() <fixture.base.Fixture.with_data>` you need `nose`_ installed, so run::

    easy_install 'fixture[decorators]'

.. note::
    The above commands may require root access

For more variants on the ``easy_install`` command, such as installing database libraries, see :ref:`Using LoadableFixture <using-loadable-fixture>`.

The source is available from the `fixture package`_ or the `fixture repository`_ and the following command works with or without setuptools_::

    cd /path/to/source
    python setup.py install

To run Fixture's own test suite you need to create a buildout ::

    python setup_test_buildout.py
    ./bin/buildout

Then you can run the tests with ::

    ./bin/test-fixture

.. _nose: http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/
.. _virtualenv: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv
.. _easy_install: http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/EasyInstall
.. _setuptools: http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/setuptools
.. _fixture package: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/fixture
.. _fixture repository: http://fixture.googlecode.com/hg/#egg=fixture-dev
.. _buildout: http://www.buildout.org/

------------
Requirements
------------

At the moment fixture is only tested on Python 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 so it may or may not
work with other versions.  The module does not depend on external libraries for its core functionality but
to do something interesting you will need one of several 3rd party libraries
(explained later in the documentation).

---------------------------------
Loading and referencing test data
---------------------------------

There are a couple ways to test a database-backed application.  You can create `mock objects`_ and concentrate entirely on `unit testing`_ individual components without testing the database layer itself, or you can simply load up sample data before you run a test.  Thanks to ``sqlite`` in-memory connections, the latter may be more efficient than you think.

But it's easy enough to insert data line by line in code, right?  Or simply load a SQL file?  Yes, but this has two major downsides: you often have to worry about and manage complex chains of foreign keys manually; and when referencing data values later on, you either have to copy / paste the values or pass around lots of variables.

The fixture module simplifies this by breaking the process down to two independent components:

**DataSet**
    Defines sets of sample data
**Fixture**
    Knows how to load data

.. _mock objects: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mock_object
.. _unit testing: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing
.. _functional test: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_test
.. _code coverage: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_coverage

-----------------
Examples of Usage
-----------------

Fixture can be used to load :class:`DataSet <fixture.dataset.DataSet>` objects into the following backends:

- `SQLAlchemy`_
- `SQLObject`_
- `Google Datastore`_
- `Django ORM`_
- `Storm`_

You can read the section on :ref:`loading data <using-loadable-fixture>` for general information.  For a complete end-to-end example see :ref:`Using Fixture To Test A Pylons + SQLAlchemy App <using-fixture-with-pylons>`, :ref:`Using Fixture To Test A Google App Engine Site <using-fixture-with-appengine>` or :ref:`using-fixture-with-django`.  This should help you understand how to fit ``fixture`` into a finished app.

.. _SQLAlchemy: http://www.sqlalchemy.org/
.. _SQLObject: http://www.sqlobject.org/
.. _Google Datastore: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/datastore/
.. _Django ORM: http://docs.djangoproject.com/
.. _Storm: http://storm.canonical.com/

Now, on to the knitty gritty details ...

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   using-dataset
   using-loadable-fixture
   using-fixture-with-pylons
   using-fixture-with-appengine
   using-fixture-with-django
   using-fixture-cmd
   using-temp-io

-----------------
API Documentation
-----------------

.. toctree::
   :glob:

   api/*

------
Status
------

fixture was originally a reimplementation of `testtools.fixtures`_, the first attempt at the idea.  As of September 2009 the fixture module is used in several test suites by the author's development team at work using the SQLAlchemy backend.  Several contributors seem to be using it in their own projects as well for various backends like Google App Engine and Django.  The project started in 2007.

.. _testtools.fixtures : http://testtools.python-hosting.com/

.. _index-contact:

-------
Contact
-------

Read on for info on submitting `issues`_.  For general discussion about fixture, how about the `Testing In Python`_ mailing list?  Otherwise, you can try me here: kumar.mcmillan @gmail.com

-------------------------------------
Where to submit issues, patches, bugs
-------------------------------------

Please submit any issues, patches, failing tests, and/or bugs using the `Issue
Tracker`_ on the `fixture project site`_.  If your code is used, your contribution will be
acknowledged in the docs.

---------
Changelog
---------

- 1.5.3

  - Added support for Django 1.8 and 1.9
  - **Backwards incompatible change**: Removed support for Django models ``app_label``

- 1.5.1

  - Fixed django testcase transactions not being properly encapsulated
  - Sets now can be assigned to multi-value columns
  - Fixed sqlalchemy requirement accidentally added.
  - Fixed method "exists" issue
  - Fixed issue where _expunge_all would try to cycle through None variables
  - Fixed test for transaction support for django 1.5
  - Fixed some tests regarding the newer versions of SQLAlchemy
  - Added alias to release this package to pypi

- 1.4

  - `Storm ORM <https://storm.canonical.com/>`_ support added by Bozo Dragojevic

- 1.3

  - Django support added by `Ben Ford <http://bitbucket.org/boothead/>`_.  See :ref:`using-fixture-with-django`
  - Using session.add() when in sqlalchemy 0.5.2+ to avoid deprecation warning (reported by Jeff Balogh)
  - Google Code repository migrated from Subversion to `Mercurial <http://code.google.com/p/fixture/source/browse/>`_.

- 1.2

  - Added support for DataSet to JSON conversion

- 1.1.2

  - Fixed bugs relating to SQLAlchemy 0.5 support (still not fully complete)

- 1.1.1

  - Fixed bugs in :mod:`Google App Engine Datastore <fixture.loadable.google_datastore_loadable>` thanks to reports and patches by Tomas Holas
  - Fixed installation bug thanks to report by bslesinsky
  - Made progress on SQLAlchemy 0.5 support (not yet complete) thanks to reports and patches from Alex Marandon
  - Improved scoped session handling for :mod:`SQLAlchemy <fixture.loadable.sqlalchemy_loadable>`

- 1.1

  - Added support for loading data into the :mod:`Google App Engine Datastore <fixture.loadable.google_datastore_loadable>`
  - Added :func:`fixture.util.reset_log_level`
  - CHANGED the default log level to CRITICAL for all internal fixture logs so that they don't output gobs of debug code when some other module adds a handler to the root logger.
  - A couple bugs fixed

- 1.0

  - First release where :mod:`SQLAlchemy components <fixture.loadable.sqlalchemy_loadable>` worked well for 0.4, everything else was pretty stable

- 0.9

  - First release where everything "kinda worked"

.. _Testing In Python: http://lists.idyll.org/listinfo/testing-in-python
.. _issues: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/issues/list
.. _Issue Tracker: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/issues/list
.. _fixture project site: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/

Commit message:

Bumped version to 1.5.4 and updated changelog
Fixes #22

docs/source/index.rst, after:


========================
Using the fixture module
========================

fixture is a python module for loading and referencing test data

It provides several utilities for achieving a *fixed state* when testing
Python programs.  Specifically, these utilities setup / teardown databases and
work with temporary file systems.  This is useful for testing and came about to
fulfill stories like these:

- I want to load data into a test database and easily reference that data when making assertions.
- I want data linked by foreign key to load automatically and delete without integrity error.
- I want to reference linked rows by meaningful names, not hard-coded ID numbers.
- I don't want to worry about auto-incrementing sequences.
- I want to recreate an environment (say, for a bug) by querying a database for real data.
- I want to test with files in a temporary, transparent file system.

For more info, this concept is explained in the wikipedia article, `Test Fixture`_.

.. _Test Fixture: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_fixture

*Database testing is easier than I had thought. Kumar's fixture helps provide a stable database to drive testing.* -- `Steven F. Lott, summarizing PyCon 2007`_

.. _Steven F. Lott, summarizing PyCon 2007: http://homepage.mac.com/s_lott/iblog/architecture/C1597055042/E20070226153515/index.html

.. _download-fixture:

------------------
Download / Install
------------------

Using the easy_install_ command::

    easy_install fixture

Or `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_ ::

    pip install fixture

If you want to use decorators like :meth:`@fixture.with_data() <fixture.base.Fixture.with_data>` you need `nose`_ installed, so run::

    easy_install 'fixture[decorators]'

.. note::
    The above commands may require root access

For more variants on the ``easy_install`` command, such as installing database libraries, see :ref:`Using LoadableFixture <using-loadable-fixture>`.

The source is available from the `fixture package`_ or the `fixture repository`_ and the following command works with or without setuptools_::

    cd /path/to/source
    python setup.py install

To run Fixture's own test suite you need to create a buildout ::

    python setup_test_buildout.py
    ./bin/buildout

Then you can run the tests with ::

    ./bin/test-fixture

.. _nose: http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/
.. _virtualenv: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv
.. _easy_install: http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/EasyInstall
.. _setuptools: http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/setuptools
.. _fixture package: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/fixture
.. _fixture repository: http://fixture.googlecode.com/hg/#egg=fixture-dev
.. _buildout: http://www.buildout.org/

------------
Requirements
------------

At the moment fixture is only tested on Python 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 so it may or may not
work with other versions.  The module does not depend on external libraries for its core functionality but
to do something interesting you will need one of several 3rd party libraries
(explained later in the documentation).

---------------------------------
Loading and referencing test data
---------------------------------

There are a couple ways to test a database-backed application.  You can create `mock objects`_ and concentrate entirely on `unit testing`_ individual components without testing the database layer itself, or you can simply load up sample data before you run a test.  Thanks to ``sqlite`` in-memory connections, the latter may be more efficient than you think.

But it's easy enough to insert data line by line in code, right?  Or simply load a SQL file?  Yes, but this has two major downsides: you often have to worry about and manage complex chains of foreign keys manually; and when referencing data values later on, you either have to copy / paste the values or pass around lots of variables.

The fixture module simplifies this by breaking the process down to two independent components:

**DataSet**
    Defines sets of sample data
**Fixture**
    Knows how to load data

.. _mock objects: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mock_object
.. _unit testing: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing
.. _functional test: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_test
.. _code coverage: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_coverage

-----------------
Examples of Usage
-----------------

Fixture can be used to load :class:`DataSet <fixture.dataset.DataSet>` objects into the following backends:

- `SQLAlchemy`_
- `SQLObject`_
- `Google Datastore`_
- `Django ORM`_
- `Storm`_

You can read the section on :ref:`loading data <using-loadable-fixture>` for general information.  For a complete end-to-end example see :ref:`Using Fixture To Test A Pylons + SQLAlchemy App <using-fixture-with-pylons>`, :ref:`Using Fixture To Test A Google App Engine Site <using-fixture-with-appengine>` or :ref:`using-fixture-with-django`.  This should help you understand how to fit ``fixture`` into a finished app.

.. _SQLAlchemy: http://www.sqlalchemy.org/
.. _SQLObject: http://www.sqlobject.org/
.. _Google Datastore: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/datastore/
.. _Django ORM: http://docs.djangoproject.com/
.. _Storm: http://storm.canonical.com/

Now, on to the knitty gritty details ...

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   using-dataset
   using-loadable-fixture
   using-fixture-with-pylons
   using-fixture-with-appengine
   using-fixture-with-django
   using-fixture-cmd
   using-temp-io

-----------------
API Documentation
-----------------

.. toctree::
   :glob:

   api/*

------
Status
------

fixture was originally a reimplementation of `testtools.fixtures`_, the first attempt at the idea.  As of September 2009 the fixture module is used in several test suites by the author's development team at work using the SQLAlchemy backend.  Several contributors seem to be using it in their own projects as well for various backends like Google App Engine and Django.  The project started in 2007.

.. _testtools.fixtures : http://testtools.python-hosting.com/

.. _index-contact:

-------
Contact
-------

Read on for info on submitting `issues`_.  For general discussion about fixture, how about the `Testing In Python`_ mailing list?  Otherwise, you can try me here: kumar.mcmillan @gmail.com

-------------------------------------
Where to submit issues, patches, bugs
-------------------------------------

Please submit any issues, patches, failing tests, and/or bugs using the `Issue
Tracker`_ on the `fixture project site`_.  If your code is used, your contribution will be
acknowledged in the docs.

---------
Changelog
---------


- 1.5.4

  - Fixed issue that required Django everytime a Fixture was imported, caused by changes in previous version.

- 1.5.3

  - Added support for Django 1.8 and 1.9
  - **Backwards incompatible change**: Removed support for Django models ``app_label``

- 1.5.1

  - Fixed django testcase transactions not being properly encapsulated
  - Sets now can be assigned to multi-value columns
  - Fixed sqlalchemy requirement accidentally added.
  - Fixed method "exists" issue
  - Fixed issue where _expunge_all would try to cycle through None variables
  - Fixed test for transaction support for django 1.5
  - Fixed some tests regarding the newer versions of SQLAlchemy
  - Added alias to release this package to pypi

- 1.4

  - `Storm ORM <https://storm.canonical.com/>`_ support added by Bozo Dragojevic

- 1.3

  - Django support added by `Ben Ford <http://bitbucket.org/boothead/>`_.  See :ref:`using-fixture-with-django`
  - Using session.add() when in sqlalchemy 0.5.2+ to avoid deprecation warning (reported by Jeff Balogh)
  - Google Code repository migrated from Subversion to `Mercurial <http://code.google.com/p/fixture/source/browse/>`_.

- 1.2

  - Added support for DataSet to JSON conversion

- 1.1.2

  - Fixed bugs relating to SQLAlchemy 0.5 support (still not fully complete)

- 1.1.1

  - Fixed bugs in :mod:`Google App Engine Datastore <fixture.loadable.google_datastore_loadable>` thanks to reports and patches by Tomas Holas
  - Fixed installation bug thanks to report by bslesinsky
  - Made progress on SQLAlchemy 0.5 support (not yet complete) thanks to reports and patches from Alex Marandon
  - Improved scoped session handling for :mod:`SQLAlchemy <fixture.loadable.sqlalchemy_loadable>`

- 1.1

  - Added support for loading data into the :mod:`Google App Engine Datastore <fixture.loadable.google_datastore_loadable>`
  - Added :func:`fixture.util.reset_log_level`
  - CHANGED the default log level to CRITICAL for all internal fixture logs so that they don't output gobs of debug code when some other module adds a handler to the root logger.
  - A couple bugs fixed

- 1.0

  - First release where :mod:`SQLAlchemy components <fixture.loadable.sqlalchemy_loadable>` worked well for 0.4, everything else was pretty stable

- 0.9

  - First release where everything "kinda worked"

.. _Testing In Python: http://lists.idyll.org/listinfo/testing-in-python
.. _issues: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/issues/list
.. _Issue Tracker: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/issues/list
.. _fixture project site: http://code.google.com/p/fixture/
